All commandline applications shipped with Haiku are in /boot/system/bin/. Your own or additionally installed commandline apps will appear in ~/config/bin/ when installed from a .hpkg package. Otherwise you can put them into ~/config/non-packaged/bin/. All these locations are part of the PATH variable and are therefore automatically found.
Here's a list of all commandline applications that are shipped with Haiku. Each with only a short description of what it does, for more detailed information on its usage execute the command with the parameter --help.

Index: A – E :: F – J :: K – O :: P – S :: T – Z 

CortexAddOnHost		Starts service to monitor audio and video media add-ons in use.
FirstBootPrompt		Language and keymap setup.
[		Returns true/false after comparing items.

A - E
addattr		Writes an attribute to a file, taking the type into account and converting the values accordingly. (Haiku specific)
alert		Shows a message box. (Haiku specific)
arp		Manipulates the system ARP cache.
awk		See gawk.
base64		Base64 encode or decode to standard output.
basename		Strips directory and optionally suffix from a /path/to/filename string.
bash		Bourne-again shell.
bc		An arbitrary precision calculator language.
beep		Rings a bell.
bfsinfo		Analyses the filesystem.
bunzip2		See bzip2.
bzip2		File compressor.
c++		C++-Compiler.
cat		Concatenates files and prints to standard output.
catattr		Prints out the contents of an attribute of a file. (Haiku specific)
cc		C-Compiler.
checkfs		Checks and repairs the file system. (Haiku specific)
checkitout		Checks out sources simply with their repository's URL.
chgrp		Changes group ownership of files.
chmod		Changes permissions of files.
chop		Splits a file into smaller files.
chown		Changes the owner of files.
chroot		Runs a command within a specified root directory.
cksum		Prints out CRC checksum and byte count of files.
clear		Clears the terminal window.
clipboard		Manipulates the system clipboard.
cmp		Compares files byte by byte.
collectcatkeys 		Collects translatable strings to create catkeys.
comm		Compares sorted files line by line.
consoled		Console daemon.
copyattr		Copies all or a subset of attributes from one or more files to another or new file. (Haiku specific)
cp		Copies files and directories.
csplit		Split a file into pieces separated by a specified pattern.
cut		Prints out sections from each line of a file.
date		Displays or sets the current time and date.
dc		Desk calculator language.
dd		Copies raw data, converting and formatting according operands.
desklink		Installs items in Deskbar. (Haiku specific)
df		Reports free and used space of mounted volumes.
diff		Compares files line by line.
diff3		Compares three files line by line.
dircolors		Color setup for ls.
dirname		Strips the filename from a /path/to/filename string.
diskimage		Registers a file as disk device that can then be mounted. (Haiku specific)
dpms		Sets the display power management.
draggers		Shows/sets the dragger state of Replicants.
driveinfo		Shows hardware information.
dstcheck		Shows a message box used when switching to/from daylight saving time.
du		Summarizes disk usage of each file, recursively for directories.
dumpcatalog		Shows the contents of catalog files.
echo		Displays a line of text.
egrep		See grep.
eject		Ejects removable media.
env		Runs a program in a modified environment.
error		Prints clear text error messages for given error numbers.
expand		Converts tabs to spaces.
expr		Prints the value of an expression.

F - J
factor		Prints the prime factors of integer numbers.
false		Does nothing, indicates "unsuccessful" and returns the value "1".
fdinfo		Shows info about the used file descriptors in the system.
ffm		Sets focus follows mouse.
fgrep		See grep.
filepanel		Displays a load/save file panel. (Haiku specific)
find		Searches for files in a directory hierarchy.
finddir		Finds special directories defined by the system.
findpaths		Prints all paths for system defined directory constants.
fmt		Reformats the paragraphs of a file.
fold		Wraps input lines of a file.
fortune		Prints a random, hopefully interesting, adage.
fstrim		Send a TRIM command to an SSD drive.
ftpd		FTP daemon.
funzip		Extracts the first item of an archive to standard output.
fwcontrol		FireWire control program.
gawk		Pattern scanning and processing language.
getarch		Shows the environment's compiler version.
grep		Search for a pattern.
groups		Prints group memberships for each username.
gunzip		See gzip.
gzexe		De/Compresses executables.
gzip		De/Compresses files.
hd		Hexdump.
head		Prints the first lines of a file.
hey		A small tool for scripting GUI apps.
hostname		Prints or sets the hostname of the system.
id		Prints user and group information.
ifconfig		Configures a network interface.
install		Copies files to a destination without disrupting the running system.
install-wifi-firmwares.sh		Installs firmware for various wireless network cards.
installsound		Installs a new sound event in the Sounds preferences panel.
iroster		Lists input devices.
isvolume		Gets information about a mounted volume.
join		For each pair of input lines with identical join fields, write a line to standard output. 

K - O
kernel_debugger		Enters the kernel debugger.
keymap		Loads or saves a keymap.
kill		Sends a signal to quit a process.
launch_roster		Controls the launch_daemon, e.g. stop and restart services. (Haiku specific)
less		Views a file.
lessecho		Echos its arguments and expands metacharacters, such as * and ? in filenames.
lesskey		Specifies key binding for less.
link		Creates a link to a file.
linkcatkeys		Creates catalogs from catkeys.
listarea		Lists area info for all currently running teams.
listattr		Lists the attributes of a file. (Haiku specific)
listdev		Lists all hardware devices.
listimage		Lists image info for all currently running teams.
listport		Lists all open ports in the system organized by team.
listres		Lists resources of files.
listsem		Lists the semaphores allocated by the specified team.
listusb		Lists USB devices.
ln		Creates a link to a file.
locale		Shows the set preferred language, its LC_CTYPE and the preferred formatting.
locate		Locates a file.
logger		Sends a message to the system log.
login		Starts a session on the system.
logname		Prints the name of the current user.
ls		Lists directory content.
lsindex		Displays the indexed attributes on the current volume/partition. (Haiku specific)
mail2mbox		Converts BeOS e-mail files to Unix mailbox files.
make		GNU make utility.
makebootable		Makes the specified BFS partitions/devices bootable by writing boot code into the first two sectors.
mbox2mail		Converts Unix mailbox files to BeOS e-mail files.
md5sum		Prints or checks MD5 checksums.
media_client		"media_client play" plays back audio files.
message		Prints a flattened BMessage file.
mimeset		Sets MIME type of a file.
mkdepend		Makefile dependency generator.
mkdir		Creates a directory.
mkdos		Initializes FAT partitions.
mkfifo		Creates named pipes.
mkfs		Creates a file system.
mkindex		Creates a new index for an attribute. (Haiku specific)
mktemp		Safely creates a temporary file or directory.
modifiers		Prints currently (un)pressed modifier keys.
more		See less.
mount		Mounts a file system.
mount_nfs		Mounts a NFS partition.
mountvolume		Mounts a volume by name.
mv		Moves/renames a file.
nano		The default text editor in the Terminal, a clone of 'Pico'.
netstat		Prints network connections, routing tables, interface statistics, masquerade connections and multicast memberships.
nl		Prints each file with line numbers added.
nohup		Runs a command ignoring hangup signals.
nproc		Prints the number of available processing units.
od		Writes an unambiguous representation of a file.
open		Launches an application/document from the shell. (Haiku specific)

P - S
package		Creates, inspects, or extracts a Haiku package.
package_repo		Creates or inspects a Haiku package repository file.
passwd		Changes the user password.
paste		Prints lines consisting of the sequentially corresponding lines from each file, separated by tabs.
patch		Applies a diff file to an original.
pathchk		Diagnoses invalid or unportable file names.
pc		Programmer's calculator.
ping		Sends ICMP-echo-request to network host.
pkgman		Manages packages and package repositories.
pr		Paginates or columnates files for printing.
printenv		Prints the value of an environment variable.
printf		Formats and prints data.
prio		Changes priority of a process.
profile		Profiles threads.
ps		Lists running processes.
ptx		Outputs a permuted index, including context, of the words in the input files.
pwd		Prints current directory.
query		A shell utility emulating Tracker's "Find by formula" functionality. (Haiku specific)
quit		Quits an application.
ramdisk		Creates a ramdisk. (Haiku specific)
rc		Resource compiler.
readlink		Prints the path to the destination of a symbolic link.
recover		A tool that tries to recover files from a corrupted BFS volume (see its documentation for a bit more info).
reindex		Puts attributes of existing files into newly created indexes. (Haiku specific)
release		Releases a semaphore.
renice		Alters the priority of a running process.
rm		Removes files and directories.
rmattr		Removes an attribute from a file. (Haiku specific)
rmdir		Removes directories.
rmindex		Removes the index for an attribute. (Haiku specific)
roster		Prints information about running teams.
route		Lists and manipulates network routes.
safemode		Checks if the system is running in safemode.
screen_blanker		Starts the screen blanker.
screenmode		Show/sets the screen mode. (Haiku specific)
sdiff		Shows or merges differences of two files side-by-side.
seq		Prints a sequence of numbers.
setarch		Sets the environment to a specific compiler version.
setdecor		Shows/sets the decorator.
settype		Sets the MIME type, signature and preferred application of a file.
setversion		Shows the version of a file.
setvolume		Sets the system sound volume. (Haiku specific)
sftp		File transfer program.
sh		See bash.
sha1sum		Prints or checks SHA1 checksums.
shar		Creates shell archives.
shred		Overwrites a file repeatedly.
shuf		Prints a random permutation of the input lines.
shutdown		Shuts down the computer.
sleep		Pauses for a specified number of seconds.
sort		Prints a sorted concatenation of all files.
spamdbm		Classifies e-mail messages as spam or genuine.
split		Outputs fixed-size pieces of input files to files with prefixes.
stat		Displays file or file system status.
strace		Traces the syscalls of a thread or a team.
stty		Shows/sets terminal characteristics.
su		Changes the effective user id and group.
sum		Prints checksum and block counts for each file.
sync		Forces changed blocks to disk, updates the superblock.
sysinfo		Shows system info. 

T - Z
tac		Concatenates and prints files, last line first.
tail		Prints the last ten lines of a file.
tcpdump		Dumps traffic of a network.
tcptester		[deprecated]
tee		Writes or appends data from standard input to a file.
telnet		User interface to the telnet protocol.
telnetd		Telnet daemon.
test		Returns true/false after comparing items.
timeout		Starts a command and kills it if it's still running after a specified number of seconds.
top		Displays running threads and CPU usage.
touch		Changes a file's timestamp.
tput		Initializes a terminal or query terminfo database.
tr		Translates, squeezes and/or deletes characters from standard input.
traceroute		Prints the route packets take through a network.
translate		Uses DataTranslators to convert file formats.
trash		Sends files to trash or restores them.
true		Does nothing, indicates "success" and returns the value "0".
truncate		Shrinks or extends the size of a file.
tsort		Does a topological sorting.
tty		Prints the file name of the terminal connected to standard input.
uname		Prints out system information.
unchop		Recreates a file previously split with chop.
unexpand		Converts spaces to tabs.
uniq		Filters adjacent matching lines from input, writing to output.
unlink		Calls the unlink function to remove the specified file.
unmount		Unmounts a volume.
unrar		Expands a rar archive.
unshar		Expands a shar archive.
untrash		See trash.
unzip		Expands a zip archive.
unzipsfx		Used to make existing zip archives self-extracting.
updatedb		Updates a localization database.
uptime		Prints date and time, as well as the time elapsed since the system was started.
urlwrapper		Wraps URL MIME types around command line or other apps that don't handle them directly.
useradd		Creates a new user.
uudecode		Decodes a uuencoded file.
uuencode		Uuencodes a file so it can be mailed to a remote system.
vdir		Lists information about files.
version		Returns the version of a file.
vmstat		Prints information about the virtual memory system.
waitfor		Waits until a certain thread appears. (Haiku specific)
watch		Executes a program periodically.
wc		Prints the number of paragraphs, words and characters (bytes) of a file.
wget		Tool for downloading via HTTP, HTTPS or FTP.
which		Locates a command.
whoami		Prints user name associated with the current effective user ID.
xargs		Builds and executes command lines from standard input.
xres		Lists and manipulates resources.
yes		Prints out a string repeatedly until killed.
zcat		See gzip.
zcmp		See zdiff.
zdiff		Compares compressed files.
zforce		Forces a '.gz' extension on gzip files.
zgrep		Scan through possibly compressed files for a regular expression.
zip		Adds or replaces items in a zip archive.
zipcloak		Encrypts all unencrypted items in a zip archive.
zipgrep		Scans the given zip items for a string or pattern.
zipinfo		See unzip.
zipnote		Prints the comments in a zip archive.
zipsplit		Splits a zip archive into smaller pieces.
zmore		Like more but operates on the uncompressed contents of any compressed file.
znew		Recompresses .Z files into .gz (gzip) archives.


https://www.haiku-os.org/docs/userguide/en/applications/list-cli-apps.html#
